To review the field notes of the
cosmological explorer whose heroic
efforts to tear down the blinders of
this reality have yet to be fully
grokked by the world. This is Neon
Galactic. I'm James FauLK. Thanks for
joining us. Remember please to like this
video and subscribe to this channel.
Over the past 3 years Neon Galactic has
hosted an unmatched parade of brilliant
minds, folks from various fields and
perspectives who've done the hard work
and homework necessary to help the rest
of us shake off the choking collar of
old paradigmatic thinking. UFOs,
non-human intelligence, spirituality,
psi phenomenon, NDEs, the occult,
esoterica, consciousness, philosophy,
astrology, science, you name it. We've
hosted a gamut of guests that rivals
even the most popular channels and
podcasts in this space and I'm grateful
in the extreme for those of you who've
come along so far on this transformative
ride into revolutionary thinking. One
recurring partner in ontological crime
has been my occasional co-host and good
friend David Stuss, a science educator
from Camosun College in British
Columbia. He's here today for an
exciting episode. Today's guest is
someone I've been pursuing ever since
the show got started. Christopher Bache
is professor emeritus in the Department
of Philosophy and Religious Studies at
Youngstown State University. He's also
an adjunct faculty member for the
California Institute of Integral
Studies.
He's the author of LSD and the mind of
the universe, Diamonds from Heaven, and
Dark Night, Early Dawn, Steps to a Deep
Ecology of Mind. Both of these books
serve as a challenge to long accepted
notions of reality and human
consciousness. The experiences described
in these volumes took place in phases
over 20 years and were produced by Basis
Therapeutic protocol of taking LSD, 73
massive doses of between 5 and 600
micrograms that propelled him into an
unfolding process of purification and
discovery. Astride the psychedelic, Bash
moved progressively through a deeply
evolutionary process that allowed him
access to some of the deepest layers of
human and universal consciousness.
What he learned in those journeys, I
believe, has the power to transform the
species, both how we see our individual
lives and egos as held as well as how we
understand the role of our lives as
holons within the vast living
intelligence that is the cosmos.
This will be a deep and at times
alarming conversation, but one that
ultimately renders a compelling
definition of the meaning behind
existence and the truths that radiate
from the cosmic core.
Welcome, Christopher and David. Thank
you for joining me.
>> [clears throat]
>> Thank you, James. I hope I can live up
to that very warm introduction.
>> And David, well, thank thank you for
joining us again and taking over the
co-hosting duties today for us.
>> Thank you for having me. Yeah, this is a
real a real privilege for me. I'm a a
deep admirer of Christopher's work in a
lot of ways and yeah, I'm really excited
about what we can explore today.
>> Yeah, me too. Me too. So, let's start
from ground level, base camp as they
say. Chris, if you could give us a a
summary of sort of how you ended up in
the in the researching of consciousness
and and these experiences,
what gave you permission to kind of
engage with such a courageous
you know, exploration of self and all?
>> Well, I just finished my graduate work
at Brown University. I got my doctoral
doctorate in philosophy of religion.
I got a job at Youngstown State
University in Northeast Ohio
and within two within 1 year, I read the
work of two people who changed my life.
I was looking at where to take my
research next. The first was Ian
Stevenson and his work on reincarnation.
And more importantly, was Stanislav
Grof. I read
his Realms of the Human Unconscious.
Now, we have to go far back in Um and in
I started I read Stan's work and I just
knew I had to get involved in doing this
work that if I recognized immediately
the philosophical if import of what he
was saying. And I I knew you had to do
this work personally. It wasn't
sufficient to do second-hand knowledge.
And so I began what became a 20-year
journey working following Stan's
protocol working with high doses of LSD
in a psychedelic therapeutic protocol.
And um
It I started this when I was 30 years
old uh just after my first Saturn
return. I finished when I was 50.
I waited another 20 years before writing
LSD in the Mind of the Universe cuz I
really wanted to study It took a long
time to study and put all the pieces
together and try to create the map that
I share in that book. And I also had to
wait until I finished teaching at the
university because what I did was
illegal. And
I'd like my job teaching. I love
teaching, but I had to wait until I was
done with that job before I could really
fully reveal what I had done in the
psychedelic work.
>> Yeah.
It's interesting. I mean, I think for
some folks who may not be familiar
familiar, it's useful to sort of
break down how Stanislav Grof views the
human mind, right? Like there's
the various levels that say Jung was
talking about and familiar with, but
then there's also a vast realm that
that's
sort of the transpersonal space that
opens up sort of underneath the
consciousness and encompasses ultimately
everything. Do you think that's fair to
say?
>> Yeah, I think it is. It's basically Stan
divides it into three different
dimensions, the psychodynamic realm. You
see I got my kitty cat here wants to
join the conversation.
>> [laughter]
>> And the second is the perinatal
dimension, the interface between the
personal self-consciousness and
transpersonal consciousness. But by far
the largest domain is transpersonal
consciousness,
which is a huge territory covering I
mean it it's like the difference between
the atmosphere around the earth
and the upper stratosphere when we move
into
relationship with space domains, and
then all the rest of it is space, is
outer space. And that's like it is with
the mind of the universe. All the rest
of it is transpersonal reality.
>> Yeah.
>> David, if you have any questions, feel
free to jump in. I can keep going
forever.
>> Not just yet. Thank you. Please go on.
>> Okay. Yeah, that's fine.
Um and so I mean part of what Stanislav
Grof
I'm not a Grof scholar, so I want to
pause at that in the beginning, but from
what I understand is that he began to
sort of do the work in mapping some of
this using different protocols to get
people into
what would you call visionary states?
There are things like holotropic
breathing was one mechanism for that,
and then psychedelics, of course,
is another. Um
>> He started in Czechoslovakia, and by the
time he wrote Realms of the Human
Unconscious, he had already worked for
15-20 years
working with psychedelics. He basically
did most of his work there in
psycholytic therapy, low-dose therapy.
Then when he came to Spring Grove
Hospital in Maryland later, he shifted
to psychedelic or high-dose therapy
because he was working with death
anxiety for terminal cancer patients.
When LSD was no longer legally legal, he
developed with his wife then wife
Christina holotropic breathwork, which
is using breathwork and various body
postures and and physical massage to
access the same or just awaken the same
deep states of consciousness in a
person.
>> And one of the things that you're
careful to delineate in the book and
also in an article that you shared with
us afterwards was that there's a
difference between doing this for
spiritual work, like to kind of
cultivate the soul and achieve maybe
some steps toward enlightenment or
personal peace, and then cosmological
exploration.
And you're very careful to say what you
were doing was cosmological exploration
and you use the metaphor as of the sun
as a way to kind of illustrate that. Can
you walk us through that metaphor and
how it works in relation to these two
>> Well, the major focus of the psychedelic
renaissance today is
healing the personal psyche. It's
therapeutic healing, which is perfectly
appropriate. It's It's where we're It's
what's giving us access to psychedelics
again today. The The careful scientific
documentation of the powerful amplifying
effects of these substances and their
effectiveness to accelerate healing.
So I differentiate therapeutic healing,
spiritual awakening, and cosmological
exploration. I began this work to sort
of accelerate my own spiritual
awakening, but because the protocol that
I used was so powerful
that within a couple of years I was
entering domains of reality that
the experiences clearly were not
relating specifically or were not
serving just my personal awakening and I
entered what became a a long journey
into the substructure of spiritual
reality uh and I came
once I was through that uh and was
looking back over the whole work, I came
to recognize that this was a basically a
track in cosmological exploration. And
cosmological exploration and spiritual
awakening may serve each other, may
reinforce each other, but they are
fundamentally different. As I say at one
place in the book, you don't need to
transcend time, you don't need to go
back origin, the starting point of the
universe, you don't need to fuse into
archetypal reality in order to come to
your spiritual senses, in order to
spiritually awaken. That's a very
different task. If I had wanted to
really focus now, I would understand if
I had wanted to focus on spiritual
awakening, I would work with very low
doses of psychedelics integrated with
meditation. But being a philosopher, I
really wanted to understand how the
universe worked, what the deep structure
of reality was.
And that it was what I pursued and uh in
high-dose psychedelic work.
>> Yeah.
You did uh a lot of high doses and you
did over an extended amount of time and
you collected what seems very much like
a consistent story of what is at root in
in all of this. Um how would you rate
your confidence level in terms of you
know uh verticality with the the uh
discoveries that you made in these
states? Could it be just a subjective,
you know, uh internal
internally generated uh psychedelic trip
or are you really confident that you uh
encountered something fundamental?
>> Well, you know, this is a question that
Ken Ring asked me. Ken Ring, the author
of near-death episode studies and a good
friend and a a prolific author.
And uh when he read LSD and the Mind of
the Universe, he challenged me that to
how do I know that these are really
saying something true about reality in
the universe and not simply some echo of
my own personal unconscious or maybe
even uh the collective unconscious. So,
he and I had an exchange of several
letters and we decided at the end to
publish it. So, you can read this
extensive discussion between Ken and I
in an article published in Medium, the
online journal.
Uh it's called uh
Are deep psychedelic experiences
trustable?
And there I give the reasons for
thinking that they are trustable. First,
that they completely shattered any of my
working assumptions. They did not
reflect the reality that I was trained
to expect even from my reading of uh
psychedelic sources or or the study of
mysticism, comparative mysticism, or
Buddhism, or courses that I was
competent in.
Uh they shattered them repeatedly. It
kept showing me uh surprises, things
that I didn't have any idea of that was
possible at the time.
Uh and there are instances where uh
they're
not all, certainly not all of them can
be empirically verified, but some
instances can be empirically verified.
So, my confidence level is pretty high
partly partly just because of the
profound experiential nature of the
experiences,
uh but also because my experiences fit
within a larger tapestry of the
thousands of sessions that Stan Grof has
cataloged from hundreds of people. Uh
and when you look at the the psychedelic
literature as a whole, I think my
experiences fall squarely within that
that mainstream. I may have pushed it a
little hard in certain ways and pushed
the edges a little hard, but it it's
coherent with I think the psychedelic
experience of the of humanity. And it's
a coherent with indigenous peoples.
>> Yeah.
>> Again, when you push the edges, certain
inner layers begin to fall away.
Certain myths and certain
theologies begin to fall away and you
enter into new territory.
But basically it's congruent, I think.
>> Yeah. Can I ask
did you did you find in that process? So
not only were you seeing your
some of your your assumptions
challenged, but how did you find your
ontology changed from from where you
began with your philosophical training
and and where did it land ultimately?
>> Yeah.
>> [snorts]
>> Well, actually I began as an
atheistically inclined agnostic. That's
where all my graduate work in religious
studies left me, you know, I basically
and I wrote my dissertation on what's
called the problem of
of God predicates of of the meaning of
religious language working in the theory
of metaphor and I came to the conclusion
that other philosophers had come to that
it's impossible really to use
finite language with any semantic
precision to describe a transcendent
reality. It's like shining a flashlight
at the stars. So that's a it's a very
agnostic
starting point.
>> [snorts]
>> And that the one of the ironies is that
I've spent most of my professional life
doing just that trying to describe
>> that's what your books are doing.
>> Yeah, transcendent realities. And over
time I came to understand that
um
it's [clears throat]
it's not that difficult to describe
these things if you have experience of
these things. If you have no experience
and they're strictly a theoretical
concept, then it's almost an impassable
barrier. But if you have experience of
them and your experience is critically
arrived at and it's critical in the
sense that you've sifted it, you've
compared it to other bodies of
knowledge, and you've acquired this
information through a systematic regimen
where you go back again and again, so
that things you may not understand in
the beginning, you come to understand
with repetition when the clear
landscape, the landscape becomes clear.
Um then I think we can describe these
things with language. So much so that
I've come to think that that the holding
of ineffability as a primary
characteristic of transcendent
experience or mystical experience is
really not warranted. Um I think
ineffability is overrated uh as a
marker. I mean, I understand it is hard
to describe these things, and language
does fall short of uh describing these
things.
But I think largely uh if you can't say
where you've been,
you just got lost, you know, and so
there's more work to do to get that
precision.
>> Yeah.
To
um I'm I'm curious to about that in the
in the context of
consilience with the natural sciences.
So, um when you describe this this
pursuit as
cosmological, um
is a sense that [clears throat]
uh it's
you know, it's somehow complementary to
to the natural sciences. Do you Do you
have a sense that Well, and maybe also
part of that question is
um did you Were you ever committed to
materialism, if you if you like, as a as
a perspective that, you know,
fundamentally we're located in space and
time? Um
How do those uh How do those
perspectives connect for you?
>> Yeah.
Well,
my early starting position was very much
kind of a material reductionist as
mainstream scientific thought was then,
borrowing on Newtonian metaphysics that
was assumed in Newtonian science. But we
had already begun to transcend that in
the 1930s when we moved to quantum
theory. We were already moving beyond
the deterministic
uh paradigm, but the social sciences and
certainly the humanities were still kind
of
late come catching up, but I think
science pushed on and began to
deconstruct the materialism which had
characterized science in the in the
early 20th century.
I'm not a sci- I'm not a scientist, I'm
not a physicist, and I don't try to have
that conversation of the the
relationship between physics and
consciousness experiences.
Uh Stan does a beautiful job in the
first chapter of his book Beyond the
Brain. He has a long chapter there
exploring the parallels between quantum
theory and uh non-ordinary states of of
consciousness. And I've seen lots of
accounts along those lines.
I haven't tried to make those accounts
myself. What I've done is tried to just
describe as clearly as I can the
sequence of experiences that emerged in
the particular journey, and then I leave
it to other people to present, you know,
the the physiology, the
psychopharmacology of consciousness, and
other people to draw the correlations
with uh
emer- emerging scientific theory. I'm
very excited by some of the developments
taking place in science along these
lines, but I'm not competent to try to
talk about them. Yeah.
>> And that I [clears throat] appreciate
that. Um it's interesting, I mean, as a
as if you needed any, some bona fides as
to your experiences. Stanislav Grof came
to accept your work as an extension of
his own
research, isn't that correct? Like you
mentioned in the book that you spoke
with him about the results and he talked
about how
it was an extension of some of his ideas
and how your
and it was in a discussion around the
perinatal realm and what that
represented and how this was a
sort of
>> Yeah, I see my my I kind of expanding
the borders of Stan's work in
particularly two areas, but the first
one is what I wrote is why I wrote Dark
Night of the Soul Dawn.
And the issue is well, let me back up. I
have to give a little introduction.
>> Sure.
>> [clears throat]
>> I went through two years of work and it
was classic perinatal experiences, you
know, fetal experiences, lots of
physical purification, physical trauma,
uh and eventually leading into uh a very
powerful ego death where the universe
just took my historical identity and it
just snapped me like a twig. I mean, it
just shattered me.
Uh and so I was expecting after those
and this it was about 9, 10 sessions. I
was expecting entry into transpersonal
reality to get easier because that's
what Stan said. But what happened was
that instead of getting easier, it got
much worse. I entered into domains of
collective suffering that systematically
got wider, encompassing more and more
thousands, hundreds of thousands of
people,
and more and more time, hundreds of
years, thousands of years, until
eventually I was awash in vast tracts of
human suffering.
Now, Stan had also bumped up against
this phenomenon, but he had interpreted
it as
a resonance with the collective psyche
that was drawn into your experience by
resonance to the features of ego death
that you were undergoing.
And that's how I tried to understand it
in the beginning, but eventually I came
to the conclusion that that wasn't true
for these experiences. They went on for
too many years and they involved too
many people and too much time for me to
understand these in terms of an adjunct
to ego death. And I began I expanded
Stan's thinking by basically suggesting
that when we are operating at these
profound collective levels at the subtle
level of consciousness, the patient has
expanded from being the individual who
may have gotten this started to being
some aspect of the of the collective
psyche. We were the work was healing or
discharging or a cathecting decathecting
some of the experiences of wounds of
trauma held by the human species in its
collective memory banks. So, that's the
the first one is basically understanding
that the the size of the patient can
expand in extreme states of
consciousness to the species that of the
individual is a member of.
And and that's what I think that's how I
came to understand that cuz that's
lasted 2 and 1/2 years and that's how I
understood that work.
The other way
I expanded this work later in LSD in the
mind of the universe
is [snorts] that I came to understand
that death and rebirth
was a process that repeated itself
multiple times as one enters deeper and
deeper levels of of consciousness. That
just as you go through ego death when
you're going from time-space reality
into first levels of transpersonal
consciousness,
when you go from those first levels or
psychic levels transpersonal
consciousness into subtle consciousness
and then from subtle into causal and so
on and so forth,
you have to go through a a similar cycle
of death and rebirth and they have
certain things in common, always a loss
of control, a complete loss of all
reference points,
and a complete demand of complete
surrender.
And then an initiation into a rebirth
into a completely unexpected order of
reality which operates by different
principles, different rules, almost
different physics.
And that happens again when you move to
each level of consciousness. So, that I
began to understand that death and
rebirth is a cycle
that is a dance that plays itself out as
long as you are willing or have a a
technique that is capable of taking you
farther and farther into the vast
expanse of consciousness.
Yeah.
>> I have two things I want to say to that.
First off, it speaks to the wisdom of
some of our human predecessors
in terms of them understanding how the
importance of that death and rebirth
cycle given that that was always the
mode of initiation of various mystery
schools and whatnot. Like they they
centered that process very
consciously.
And I think that that speaks to a level
of knowledge that we're just now maybe
beginning to
recoup over time. The other thing I
wanted to say, and I think David wants
to talk a little bit about this, too, is
that idea of the collective trauma that
is in
you know, sort of the broader human
soul, right?
As I understand it, we I mean, we we
live in a reality where our individual
lives are shaped up to address our
karmic debts. That's the sort of the
wisdom that I've you know, gleaned from
conversations and book reading and
whatnot.
And it sounds like according to what
your research says, the the overall
human project is doing the same sorts of
things but on a massive on a massive
scale.
I wonder, is it possible for human
beings to materially improve their
condition if we're going through the
process of addressing karmic debt? For
instance, if there's a bunch of human
trauma that is that we're all kind of
suffering under,
and if we were to try to address that,
would we directly
could we directly improve the human
condition or are we sort of slated to go
through these things because that's the
necessary part of the death um we're
going into before we, you know, emerge
into a fresh birth.
>> Well, to answer your question, it's a
very good question. I'm going to need to
ask you and and your listeners to uh
shift into a different metaphysical
vision.
We contrast the individual and the
totality, the part and the whole. We see
these as How do they We're asking, "How
do they interact?"
>> [snorts]
>> But my experience in the sessions with
Sherman was teaching me
a way of deepening that vision, and that
is to see that each of our lives is a
fractal embodiment of themes within the
collective psyche.
So that
the collective psyche does saturate and
and shape our individual experience.
When I had started this work, I thought
it was all about individual karma,
individual soul development, individual
transformation.
But I came to understand that all of
these individual karmic streams and
these individual traumas and individual
initiatives and individual
transformation
was only looking at one layer of the of
the tissue. That there is a deeper layer
of the tissue where the entire species
is a single organism, and all of us are
cells within this organism, and its
karma and our karma are all subtly
intertwined, and there is no separation
in the final analysis. So uh I think an
individual can
outgrow the group in the in outgrowing
and handling their karma and going
beyond the group. And the when he or she
does that, it helps pull the group
forward. We never leave the group. We
never are separated from the group. Uh
and there are other individuals who, by
failing to address their karma or who,
by generating more negative karma, can
weigh the group down or kind of pull the
group back. But we are all
living and breathing within the living
and breathing of the species soul.
And what I found was that the species
internalizes and holds all of its
unresolved trauma within vast memory
stores, just as an individual holds its
unresolved trauma within its personal
memory stores. And this unresolved
trauma can influence and distort
individual functioning,
the same thing can happen at the
species. So, talk Grof talks about co-X
systems
for the individual, systems of condensed
experience, and I talk about meta co-X
systems, same kind of phenomena within
the collective psyche, huge amalgams
that hold
thematically specific memories of the
human species. And And karma is simply
it's just cause and effect. It's just
cause and effect. So, it's not just
negative karma, it's also positive
karma. It's all the virtues and kindness
and skills and and aptitudes that we're
cultivating. So So, it's just the vision
is that we're always working to improve
our individual lot, but we're working
within the collective lot, and we're all
in this together. There is no separating
our individual enlightenment
from collective enlightenment. That That
basically consciousness
is uh
it's an ecological phenomenon. There are
no fundamental membranes. Uh even though
there are function there's a relative
functional autonomy, there's no ultimate
functional autonomy between the life of
the individual and and the life of the
species.
>> I'm curious about your your thoughts
about how to um how to meet those deeper
layers in the daily living. So, is it is
it possible
um so, it it's clear that we can
potentially access
um say the collective memory in some of
these highly energized states if if the
system is capable of stabilizing there.
Do you think it's possible uh in in
one's day-to-day moments
to not only uh address, you know, the
the immediate concerns we have as as
individuals in our personal lives, but
to also
simultaneously be
>> Yeah, I got you. You got frozen up
again, but I got your question that we
can address these collective dimensions
even when we're operating in an ordinary
state of consciousness, that's not just
an a non-ordinary state. And I think the
answer to that is yes. We're always
plugged into the collective psyche.
And,
you know, our our kind of teaching has
been that all the karma we're dealing
with or all the issues we're dealing
with in our life are basically personal.
But I don't think that's an assumption,
and that's not necessarily true. Some of
I think there are many bodhisattvas,
there are many hidden saints in our
lives. And and we see this just when
some people are taking on the pain of
others through therapy or social action,
and they could have lived a much more
comfortable life on their own, but they
willingly engage and work to uh help the
ease the suffering of other people and
other circumstances. Or they're they're
striving for truth in in journalistic
reporting, or they're striving for
breakthroughs in medicine for diseases
that are not their diseases, they're
other people's diseases. We see this
that there is a a breadth and depth of
the human soul that reaches out and and
works to uplift the whole. And then I
think also at a subtler level, some of
the issues that we're dealing with may
be impregnated with or encoded with
strands of consciousness that reach deep
into the collective so that when we heal
our body of this disease or when we heal
our consciousness of this neurosis or
psychosis, I think the healing reaches
out and spreads out through this network
of our an articulate network and touches
other lives in the collective. And I
think we're all we're appreciating just
as we're beginning to appreciate there
is no species that lives out of context
of its of its natural ecological web
that they're all intertwined with each
other.
We're appreciating now that the same is
true for human beings.
We have a an individuality that we're
very proud of and we've earned it
but that individuality lives and
breathes within a context of woodwork of
inner connections. And it's hard to tell
exactly where the boundary of the
individual is and the collective starts
and the individual stops, you know.
Germs, just we're living and breathing.
We're breathing each other's microbes
all the time. Um the world we live in
energetically and penetrates our body
and we give off energy into the world.
Uh so I think we yeah, I think we can
interact and we can influence the
collective.
Uh and what's most important for most
people who are not going to do deep
psychedelic work or deep deep meditation
retreat or something like this is to
live your life as cleanly and
productively as possible. To clean up
all the opportunities that the loose
ends of your life that come forward.
Whatever is causing pain to see it all
the way to the bottom to resolve it to
live your share of karma
well so that you're live finish your
life with a sense of you've done your
work in the world. And then you don't
need to know
kind of where it came from.
All you need to do is take care of
business.
>> Can I follow up there, James? Would
>> Please, yeah, yeah.
>> Would you say that if there if there was
uh
um, a a single through line through
through all of that is that it has
something to do with the voluntary
embrace of
what is arising no matter its
difficulty?
Is that is that is there something
significant about the not turning away?
>> Yeah.
Well, certainly in meditation practice
that's true, isn't it? That we we we
have to face whatever arises and not
turn away from it. It's true in
psychedelic practice that it's really
important to not run away from what
arises, to really sit with it, let it
take us where it wants to go.
And I think that's also the mark of a of
a life well lived, just an ordinary
life,
that we don't bury whatever arises from
our life circumstances. We face it
clearly, whether it's the death of loved
ones or
things that happen at work or things
that happen outside of work or we just
try to face it and bring it to as good a
resolution as we possibly can. We don't
bury it, we don't deflect it.
You know, so I think it that's all those
are the marks of wisdom. Of you know,
right? Of mis- wisdom in in our lives.
>> Yeah.
Leading a well-examined life, it sounds
like.
Um, it's uh
you
uh
I'm interested in sort of you talk about
within the the framework of your of your
sessions that you have various
encounters with realms, but then also
what seems to be intelligences.
At times you refer them to refer to them
as the ancient ones and they seem to be
overseeing
your initiation processes.
At one point it was like you were saying
that they're
you know, they
don't like to see you in pain, but they
know it's necessary. There's almost a
humorousness about them as they see you
suffer because they know that it's
ultimately for your own good.
>> Yeah.
>> [clears throat]
>> I'm I'm wondering
uh you know
how
how far do you think you've got you went
in terms of the penetration to toward
the center of things and what do those
um
you know beings represent within those
layers and how does it relate to the
archetypes that you're referring to
within the book?
>> Yeah.
Well, this is a large question. You
know, I've I've participated in the
conference a number of years ago on DMT
and entity
uh entity encounters and the basic
thrust of the conference was to examine
the ontological status of the entities
that many people especially using DMT
encounter in their sessions.
And
though I do talk about entities in
certain ways and I'll come back to that.
Generally, what's more distinctive of my
work is the absence of a contact with
entities per se. Uh I have not a lot of
contact with individual beings.
But instead, a lot of contact with being
itself or dimensions of being.
And you know, at the conference I I had
to I proposed a possible conjecture
hypothesis for why that might be the
case.
And I suggested that um
you have to be a self
to make contact with a self.
You have to be an individual to make
contact with spiritual individuals. And
if your practice is one that grinds your
individuality so fine, it just grinds it
and grinds it into dust.
Then you're not there's not very much of
a self here. So that when you go out
into the universe, you encounter fewer
individuals and you are drawn more into
the
the bandwidth, the deeper bandwidth, the
the larger patterns of consciousness
itself.
>> Yeah.
>> Now, given that, there are times when I
do
describe these ancient ones that seem to
be
present in certain ceremonial context in
the in the work.
And I I want to emphasize that in all of
this in all psychedelic work and in all
I think all spiritual experiences, I
want to emphasize that it's a
participatory cosmology that we record.
That is, it's not like going out and
plucking apples, metaphysical apples off
the cosmic tree.
That there's a way in which the being
that we are evokes the experiences that
we encounter in those sessions.
I think of it as the the universe is an
infinite consciousness.
And our our psyche is a seed catalyst
that when we drop it into this infinite
consciousness, it catalyzes a certain
set of experiences
that come to us.
If we use those experiences well and we
let them clean us and we engage them
well,
it changes the seed crystal of our
consciousness. So that the next time we
are dropped into the infinite potential,
a deeper set of experiences can come
forward. So you see it's a it's not that
it's not that my consciousness creates
the things that I'm experiencing as if
those things aren't real,
but what is part of that consciousness I
experience is an interaction that is
drawn forward from
the structures that are left inside my
personal consciousness.
In that context, I mean there are there
places where when I encountered
archetypes, when I first broke into
archetypal reality,
and I encountered beings that were just
beyond anything I could stretch my mind
around. They were just huge. They were
vast in space. They were ancient. They
were operating on a completely different
mode of of time.
And the best my mind could do to give
them form,
I saw them as galaxies.
And I don't think they were really
galaxies, but I a galaxy that we've seen
in Hubble telescopes and whatnot is the
closest my mind could come to giving
this entity some kind of form. And I
think that's also true when I talk about
the ancient ones or here and there
that that I don't take those literally,
but I take those evocatively as
suggestive of something of the quality
of that consciousness that I'm engaging
at that point in time.
The consciousness that
there was always a consciousness guiding
my sessions. There was always a
consciousness in control of my sessions.
I had no control over where things were
going.
And this consciousness never
materialized in physical or or in any
specific form. I never had encounter
with my spirit guides. I never had
encounter with God, and if I did, I'd be
very suspicious, you know. But it was
always one step behind of me, one step
beyond me, but it was tangibly present.
I could feel it, and it would sometimes
speak to me. Mostly telepathically, it
would just speak with me.
But the deeper I went,
it would still be in front of me. And I
I would go deeper, and it was still in
front of me. So it was always kind of an
infinite field
that was just waiting and leading me out
bit by bit, letting me take in new and
new territory.
Uh but it never congealed.
It never consolidate. In fact, there's a
place when I'm talking about subtle
level reality
and the collective psyche, there's a
place where I basically talk about some
people who have had experiences of a
very specific deity wearing specific
ornaments of that deity as represented
in the literature.
Um
and my take on that is not that there is
a deity like that truly existing,
but that
the pictures of deities in certain forms
have informed
the
the thought processes and the emotional
processes of millions and billions of
people over thousands of years, which
actually ends up creating a thought
form,
which is a powerful entity, but
ultimately, it's a it's an it's an
artifact of the collective psyche.
When one goes beyond the collective
psyche, when you you move so far beyond
it, it's kind of like
going outside of the orbit of Earth.
All of those deities fall away. All of
the thought forms of history, all the
philosophies of history, all the
religions of history, all the
interpretations we've given of life, all
of them fall away because they're imbued
and they are structures within the
collective psyche. They're the best
humanity has been able to do to try to
understand reality. Reality is
infinitely bigger,
broader, deeper than we've yet been able
to grasp, and when you go beyond those,
they all fall away. So,
I don't place any ultimate significance
in deity forms
or in anything that I would identify as
a specific form, but rather I kind of
see those all as indicators, transparent
indicators of the intelligence
which is the creative intelligence
behind and within
our living universe.
>> Would that
include things [clears throat] like UFOs
and other anomalies that people have
encountered throughout history that are
sort of
>> I don't know. I mean, I had haven't
encountered these myself, so I have to
reserve judgment, but basically when you
get any kind of understanding of how big
the universe is and how young we are
relative to some of the other systems.
>> [sighs]
>> As they
>> Everything is possible, right?
>> It's
It'd be a waste of space if there
weren't other intelligent life forms,
right?
>> Yeah.
>> And so I have no problem in theory with
there being higher sentient life forms
billions of years more evolved than we
are
who have overcome the
the limitations of traveling at the
speed of light
any of those type of things. I don't
have problems with that in theory. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
David, do you have a question?
>> Yeah, I was I was wondering
um
how [snorts]
how have you come to understand the
nature
uh
of the individual in light of these
these kinds of experiences
it
it it seemed like and to to what
to what depth
must one go
before um
maybe that individuality starts to
merge. So like for example, if uh
one has an experience of becoming
something like the sun if if we like to
you know, in a manner of speaking um
if if two people, right? Who we
experience in our day-to-day living as
individuals have such an experience, it
seems like that there's a kind of merger
that is happening there.
Right? Where it's it's it's not entirely
clear who's who at that point. So do do
you have do do you have a sense of the
depth to which that that goes? um Or
like does it go all the way to the
bottom?
Where Where does the sense of
individuality arise from if we start to
strip the karma away?
>> Yeah.
Good question. You guys are asking hard
questions.
>> You wanted us to go deep. You said in
there
>> Well, some of the
some of the religious traditions like
Vedanta, Hindu Vedanta,
they believe that the individual is a
temporary construct and in the end when
one achieves enlightenment,
individuality disappears. It's the drop
returning to the ocean. So, once you
achieve enlightenment, the individual
ceases to exist. It's only the ocean.
Uh and that's not the conclusion I've
come to. I think individuality is a very
precious gift that's given us by the
physical universe. The physical universe
is the only thing strong enough to break
up the powerful of the unit of
consciousness of the source of existence
into small shards which then can evolve
individually. And I think individuality
is is a great gift. Now, at the egoic
stage of individuality, it can become
very problematic because we don't we
lose our sense of connectedness to other
beings. We can become self-centered,
selfish. We can improve our own
condition in life at the expense of
other people's condition.
Uh and so
that's what I would consider a distorted
form of individuality.
But when we spiritually mature, when we
sort of let that ego die, and when we
began to experience deeper dimensions of
not only the universe, but deeper
dimensions of our own self, a deeper
form of individuality emerges. And I
think at the soul level a fully mature
soul individuality
is has the experience of being an
individual
but not an individual that's cut off
from other individuals but an individual
that's permeable and open to other
individuals and constantly receiving
input and inflow and not an
individuality which is static over time.
So it's it's really two things it's
interconnectedness and dynamic.
So that I think when we that is the
ultimate sort of my
take on the ontological status of our
individuality. Now
what we've learned is that we can get
our boundaries can become very porous
and soft at the edges and we can fuse
with other human beings. We can fuse
with animals. We can fuse with plants.
We can fuse with spiritual beings. We
can fuse even with the sense of being
itself. We can dissolve into oneness.
But and that can feel temporarily almost
like complete loss of self. That's the
delicious feeling no self here no self
anywhere.
But eventually the self crystallizes
back out of that fusion state.
So we seem to have this is a an
extraordinary
phenomenon really that we are an
individual that can merge
with other individuals and then maintain
our integrity
in that back and forth process and I
think this is what happens in
psychedelics right? We amplify our
consciousness we open up we can get very
large
and then we come back down to our
smaller shape and size. So we can become
truly one with the cosmos one with the
divine one with each other
stay there for a while, live and breathe
there for a while,
come back and remember it, internalize
it, and learn from that experience. It
It becomes part of the learning of this
individual over time. That's
extraordinary. I think we're just
extraordinary beings with such
plasticity of consciousness. So, in my
way of thinking,
the goal is not to lose oneself in the
one.
The goal is to mature oneself to the
point where one's individuality becomes
so clear and so diamond hard that it can
withstand ever greater immersion in
divine consciousness because if [snorts]
we return to divine consciousness
prematurely or too quickly,
it's so intense that it just shatters
us. We can't stay conscious. It just
shatters us.
But if we have gone through the long
spiritual maturational process over many
lifetimes,
we can return to the intensity of the
divine love and let it in and through us
without shattering us. So, we mature
into the capacity to be in the states of
awareness that in our earlier life
would just wipe us out. But in our later
life, we can stay conscious and we can
stay operational in.
And it seems to be an open-ended
progression.
It's an It's an infinite progression
available to us. And no, I think we've
seen even our greatest spiritual
teachers have only seen a few layers
down the road, a few turns down the
road. Take us forward a million years,
we'll be able to see more down the road.
And clearly, the life project, the
creative intelligence, does not think in
short term. It thinks in terms of
billions and trillions of years. So.
>> I wonder that in terms of your own
personal progress, you did all of this,
I mean, it was over 20 years, but it was
also as a part of a a discrete series of
you know, sessions. Uh
were you
sort of a sightseer, a tourist in these
realms that you were able to penetrate,
or do you feel like that part of the
work that was happening as you were, you
know, ascending, that you were as
yourself
conditioning for that environment on a
soul level? Do you know what you
understand what I'm saying? Like you
penetrated high up into the levels of
reality. Do you feel like you're, you
know, going to be there, be allowed to
return there
in your next soul life, or is that
temporary access?
>> Good question. At first, it is temporary
access. You know, the psychedelic path
is a path of temporary immersion. So,
let's be real clear about that. There
are beings who can enter these domains,
and they can maintain access in these
domains but in an abiding way, and the
all honor to the masters who can do
that. Psychedelic work is temporary
access.
But in psychedelic work,
you know
by becoming what it is you're seeking to
know.
You don't take the trans the ego and
take it into transpersonal reality work
can have an experience, and then you can
bring it back. That happens in early
stages, but at a deeper level, you have
to allow yourself to become
what it is you're seeking to know, and
that happens spontaneously. And that's
why you have to go through death after
death after death, because
as you are in the beginning, you're just
too small.
If you want to have knowledge of the
deeper things in the universe, you have
to become a citizen of those domains.
You have to become those domains.
So, even though it's temporary,
you do
enter into intimacy. You dissolve into
those realities in order to know them.
So, then the question becomes, what is
the long-term impact of having gone
through those dissolutions, having gone
through those communions?
And I wish I could tell you that
um
I thought it would have a faster impact
on my spiritual development than in fact
it has. It has impacted my spiritual
development, but much more slowly in a
back-and-forth kind of way than I had
initially hoped that it would.
Uh but it has impacted it gen- deeply
by opening up within my being what which
you might think of my psychedelic
memories
act as strong attractors
that kind of draw me toward those
realities.
So, will I be able to return to these
deep realities when I die, or will I be
stuck in some lower levels of the bardo?
I've asked myself that many times.
And my honest assessment is
because I have done so much purifying
work along the way,
even though I can't live in those states
here on Earth,
I believe what I've been told, and that
is I will be able to return to those
realities when I shed my body.
Now, that doesn't mean
when I come back to Earth, if I come
back again, I would necessarily be able
to bring all of those states back
in incarnate form. I think there's still
work to be done there. But I I do think
I won't be denied
access to those realities
uh
when I die. And if I meet obstacles,
one of the things I've learned how to do
is I've learned how to
swallow obstacles. I've learned how to
dissolve into the obstacles.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
I I'm one of the most compelling aspects
of your story and I I didn't want to you
know, belabor this point and so I
haven't really even mentioned it up
until now but as you read your story
it's like a
a torture.
A you know, a compendium of these of
such immense pain. And what's remarkable
about it to my mind is that instead of
we talked about facing things it's like
you would have these immense moments of
agony but then you would pivot toward it
and you would endure it because you
understood at a certain point that it
was a purification process that you were
like burning away the dross so that you
could exist on this higher level usually
within the next session.
But there was also a steady rhythm to
it. You would have each session would
have the period of pain and then usually
be followed by a sort of softer gentler
immersion in
that next level.
>> Yeah.
Um
>> Once you learn that rhythm, once you
learn that it's a cycle, it's a
purification followed by ecstatic
initiation.
Once you learn that then pain stops
being your enemy. It stops being
something you run away from.
It becomes something that you willingly
embrace and it eventually becomes your
ally.
Because you realize it's all
purification especially when you get
farther along in the work and you
realize that in the deepest level you're
not going out somewhere. You're going
back you're always being returned to
where you were in the beginning.
But now when you've returned you're
clean, you're cleaner. So you experience
the full magic, the full splendor of the
present moment it as it always was. It
didn't change.
>> [laughter]
>> It didn't change. It's just that we're
clear enough maybe to be able to
experience it more cleanly, more
clearly.
Uh and I think that echoes in all the
the spiritual traditions. You know, in
the enlightened condition or or nature
of mind as the Buddhist call it,
it doesn't doesn't begin, doesn't
change, doesn't end. It's always been
there. When we when we wake into it, we
realize, "Oh my god, it's always been
here the whole time. I've just been
distracting myself."
And so I think once you learn that in
Buddhism or in the psychedelic work,
it's just a cycle of purification,
uh then you become very comfortable with
that negativity
as long as you can endure it and stay
healthy. You know, you have to stay
healthy and balanced.
>> [snorts]
>> And I really struggled with
how much of the suffering to let the
reader see when I wrote the book. And
some people some friends of mine advised
me not to show them because they would
be scared.
But I thought it was really important
that we understand how these these
sessions work, how it works. So I I
mid softened it a little bit, but I left
in plenty enough to for people to
understand. And the the point was not to
sort of
become a hero of my own story because
what good would that be? But the point
is simply to to help people understand
cuz when they do this work, when they
are working in meditation or they're
working in psychedelic work, if they
understand the dynamics of this work,
then it makes it easier for them to
cooperate with these dynamics when they
come into it.
That's all.
>> Absolutely.
Um David, do you have a question?
>> Yeah, I'll see if I go if I can frame it
in into a question. I'm I'm curious
about so
um
this um this material that generates
this suffering
um
in uh in the day-to-day living I
there's sometimes a sense of um an
accumulation of this material because in
a certain sense it's like I'm doing it
wrong. Like I'm I'm I'm not living
correctly.
Um, but one of the things that you bring
up is this uh
at some points this sense that
this this descent into matter, um the
agony of the descent into matter,
um the part of it is a kind of
forgetting
um
that of of the original connection.
>> Yeah.
>> And
that in some sense there's something
over vast time scales there's something
purposeful about that forgetting.
>> Yeah.
>> That that that it allows something to be
built uh in physical reality that was
otherwise kind of just maybe an imminent
potential or some something like that.
>> Yeah.
>> So, um
I
uh
I'm kind of wondering in the sense in um
in terms of one's orientation in the
day-to-day living, right? Like is it
okay?
Is is there is it just a confusion that
one's doing it wrong? Um, that you know,
it it it may simply be that that's part
of the forgetting process. Like do you
think it's all purposeful is or is there
some kind of reorientation that need
that that might be undertaken to to
affect or avoid or to do it better in in
the day-to-day living? Hopefully that
was sensible question.
>> Yeah. I think so. Yeah, I think you've
you've touched right into the
a very important issue. I mean,
sometimes the hardship that we encounter
in life is because we are doing it
wrong. We're you know, we're we're
making a recurring mistake or something
like that. But a lot of times it's not
because we're doing something wrong.
It's just because this is inherent in
the human condition and that's inherent
in time and space.
Now,
the metaphor I I sometimes use is a
weightlifter
who is really struggling with heavy
weight in the bar,
uh but he doesn't complain about the
weight, he doesn't blame the weight,
he's using the weight to develop muscles
faster than he ordinarily would.
And I think when spiritual beings enter
into the density of space-time, it's the
same thing. It There is a density to
time and space, and it's harder to
achieve what you
It's harder to achieve spiritual clarity
and to be able to create your destiny,
create your world out of the sheer power
of your mind. It's harder to do that
because
it's time and space is so dense that it
gives us so much resistance. But
that density actually serves to our
betterment. We can accelerate our
spiritual growth
much faster here inside time and space
than outside time and space where it is
ostensibly easier to be conscious, to
stay conscious. So, I think we choose to
be where we
will profit from. We choose to be where
we are
in order to undergo a series of
exercises that will advance us to our
own development, our own strengthening,
our own transparency. It may be towards
opening compassion, it may be towards
developing courage, it may be towards
developing generosity, it may be just
sometimes just sheer survival. The
survival, you know, the courage of
survival of circumstance.
You can't judge anybody's karma in this
way. It's a karma is a very personal
thing. It you know, and and you never
know. When you see someone suffering,
you never know whether it's because of
something they've done wrong, or it's
because they are a saint that's taking
on the suffering of other beings. You
never know. And so, the best thing to do
is just not to judge. But I do think
that there is a
It is challenging to be here in time and
space. And that's why we should never
mourn people who are dying.
If we are mourning people or grieving
people who are dying, we have our entire
cosmology upside down.
They're going home. They're graduating.
They're returning to that higher level
where they get to live and breathe in
the in the refreshment of of spirit. The
children who are being born,
>> [snorts]
>> they're if anyone they're to be born,
they're beginning their work, the hard
work it is to be here.
Uh but once we understand that
this is a place of challenge.
And it's also the place where
spiritual development can be
accelerated.
Then we start to work with it and we
become more patient with it. And we can
maybe be more patient with incremental
changes. Like if you're weightlifting,
you don't really start jumping on a
whole lot of extra on the bar, you know,
incremental changes, gradually
development your strength to deal with
these things.
I think the same thing is true in
living, too.
>> I have I
Is there a sense I mean one of the
things that you that I read a lot about
people talk a lot about is the sort of
the soul complex and how we're not
really I mean we're an individuality but
also there's parts of us that exist on
on different layers and that observe,
sort of a meta layer up in the whether
it's causal or subtle
realms, the higher self. So some of
those sufferings that we may be
experiencing on this plane may well be
chosen by our own higher selves to
affect that kind of bodybuilding like
you were just describing, correct?
>> I think so. I mean uh
I think of it sort of like a deck of
cards. We may have 52 cards in the deck,
52 former lives, but the cards that
we're playing in this incarnation is a
much smaller number. We would play the
cards we're dealt. And the soul is the
totality that holds all of those cards.
And so it's the soul who chooses to
incarnate, but very seldom does all of
the soul incarnate. As Michael Newton
says in Journey of Souls, if the entire
energy of the soul incarnated, it would
blow our circuits out.
However, having said that, I think there
is an evolutionary step that we are
pressing against right now.
I think if we think of it reincarnation
as expanding into the soul when we die,
and compressing into the ego when we're
born, and we're going back and forth,
back and forth, back and forth, and we
keep this up for thousands and thousands
of incarnations.
Doesn't it make sense that sooner or
later
the entire soul
would incarnate and wake up inside our
human incarnation?
And I think that's what's and we are in
the process of giving birth to the soul
on Earth. We This is what I call the
diamond soul. The entire
all even all of our former lives contain
learning.
All of our former lives become more and
more integrated. They become We have to
heal them, we have to work them and heal
them and bring them together, but as
they become more and more integrated,
eventually they fuse.
At least as I have experienced this in
my sessions when my lives fused, there
was an explosion
of diamond light in my heart,
and I was catapulted into a state of
consciousness where I was an individual,
but an individual beyond any frame of
reference that I had ever experienced
before.
And I think I was being given a glimpse
of what's happening for all of human
beings,
that we are all incarnating, we're all
in this polishing, developing, expanding
process.
And right now we're at coming to a time
in human history where we either grow up
or we die.
We can't run this planet in its critical
condition at the level of ego, even a
well-intentioned ego. We either grow up
and we die. But what does it mean to
grow up?
I think to grow up means to take
ownership of the depth, the whole of our
psychic existence, the whole of our
psychological existence. And that means
to allow ourselves to live the soul on
Earth. And this takes place in people's
lives sometimes slowly. It's like a slow
gradual awakening. Sometimes there's a
pop when people come into this
awareness.
Uh but I think you can see it in in the
cracks of living. When you see somebody
undertaking a project that they building
a giant dam somewhere that they will not
complete in their lifetime.
Or when someone who's 80 years old
starts to learning a foreign language
that they won't finish learning during
their lifetime. Or relationships which
have a history which will transcend this
lifetime. I think we see the symptoms of
the soul because the soul lives in time
differently
than the ego does. And the more people
are willing to commit to larger
projects, to working on for the good of
others, for working on the good of the
Earth, these are souls deep projects.
These are symptoms of the soul
manifesting its
parameters, its depth and perspective
inside our human incarnation.
And I think that just there's a synergy
taking place that just as the world is
trying to become one because the
problems we're dealing with are so
enormous,
individual nation states can't solve
them and individual nation states are
many ways causing the problems. We have
to come together as a planet. There's a
synergy between that social pressure
taking place at that geo geopolitical
level and what's taking place
intrapsychically
because we carry all the
all the peoples of the world in our
soul. We've been black, white.
We've been rich, poor. We've been in
shoulder. We've been every religion
imaginable. We've been all that stuff.
And just as the world is trying to
become one, the soul is becoming one.
There's a synergy there. And I truly do
believe that this catharsis that we are
going through, this accelerated
purification process, the collective
dark night of our soul, it seems like
society is
bringing out all the toxins and poisons
of history. And I think we are, but
we're bringing them out not to
perpetuate them. We're bringing them out
to look at them and say, "No, we can do
better than that. Let's do better than
that." And in that process, we offload
the trauma of the past and we awaken
more powerfully to the influx of energy
which is trying to give birth to the
soul in human history.
And this is not about individuals. I
think we're past the point it was about
individuals for thousands of years, but
now I think the focus is on awakening
the entire human species. We must go
through a species metamorphosis, not
simply a set of individual
metamorphoses.
And I think that people who are alive
and who are being born now, they knew
what they were getting into when before
they were born. They chose to be born at
this very intense time in history to be
part of this dynamic, to lend their
weight to this tremendous transformative
moment in history.
There are no victims here.
>> Yeah.
>> There are no victims. And remember, no
one dies.
>> Yeah.
>> Individual lives it die. Soul doesn't
die. And I And don't mean that
cavalierly. I've lost my wife. I've lost
people I that are close to me. I don't
mean this, you know, silly in a silly
manner. But at a deep level,
no one dies. Just the human body falls
away.
Consciousness continues. Evolution
continues. Spiritual development
continues.
>> Yeah.
I
uh thank you for that. I think that's a
beautiful vision and um
it one of the things that uh you know,
all there's a a
there's a series of thinkers that are
all kind of related and Ken Wilber is a
part of the group, right? I mean, he's
uh someone who has done a lot of
interesting work on consciousness and
sort of uh the different levels of
consciousness
um and uh
uh how we how we need to um uh
collectively achieve a higher level of
consciousness in order to sort of uh
cohere and handle the moment. And I can
see the sense in which um like uh the
circumstances are pushing us to uh
achieve that evolution and to be more
effective in confronting this history as
it unfolds. Um and I I uh look forward
to uh that happening more and more cuz
we're
>> Yeah. I think the Dalai Lama said it.
He said it very clearly, very simply. He
said, "My religion is compassion."
And cuz I think what's awakening is a
fundamental
experience of oneness. It's the human
heart that's awakening. If the heart
opens into oneness,
then the world will be safe from our
mind. Our mind can create devastating
weapons. But when the heart is open, we
won't use them to do harm.
And I think we are waking into oneness.
And so the the Dalai Lama's formula is
right on.
Living compassion in every circumstance,
however it's being challenged, however
whatever your enemy is, living
compassion and trying to bring every
compassion to every circumstance, That's
how we That's the simplest way
to grow. Yeah.
>> That's all I have for you, David. Did
you have any follow further questions or
>> I I was uh
I I
two two things that I um
would like to ask about. One of them, I
don't know if this is a bit of a side
quest, but um
some there were some some mention that
you had made and I certainly know you've
um
you've worked with uh Richard Tarnas and
>> [clears throat]
>> uh you talk you talk a little bit about
the connection that
uh
um he and uh Stan Grof made looking at
the correlation between some of the
perinatal material and
uh astrological transits. So, this is
something that um that that topic was
very significant for me in in my own
journey of you know, in encountering
something kind of you know, raised in a
a secular materialist worldview and
having a very challenging encounter with
an astrological reading that kind of
turned my world upside down and um
something that I think James has also
encountered a little bit more uh
recently and
has come kind of come on board with. Uh
this is still I I think in some ways
even a more controversial topic for for
many people with a kind of secular
Western worldview than than psychedelics
are. Which which do they do fit more
comfortably
uh in into a materialist perspective.
You know, it's something that the brain
is generating.
Um I'm I'm just curious if you could uh
talk about that a a little bit. I don't
know if I have a specific question about
it, but what what you think about it and
uh etc. Yeah.
>> Well, I've been a student of astrology
for most of my adult life.
>> [clears throat]
>> And when I began studying astrology in
my 30s, I was really taken by
how much insight it brought to my
personality dynamics and and then when I
began to study transit astrology, which
is the dynamic aspect of astrology, I
found that the rhythms that it was
pointing to
helped me understand the fluctuations
and rhythms of my life. And then when
Rick wrote his
fabulous book psyche and cosmos cosmos
and psyche, and he showed that this
these outer planetary relationships
correlate not only with
the life cycles of individuals, but they
also correlate with the life cycles of
humanity and in history. That's an
extraordinary accomplishment, and I
really respect it.
And so about halfway more little less
than halfway through my journey work, I
began to understand in
conversations with Rick
his insights that the the transits of
the outer planets
correlate with the well outer planets
correlate with the subject matter of the
four perinatal Chris stands for
perinatal matrices, and that the
transits of the outer planets tend to
correspond with or and even predict
the nature of the experiences that one
is likely to have in non-ordinary states
of consciousness.
And so when I saw
understood that, I began to use
astrology as to plan the timing of my
sessions within the range that I had
available.
And so and they had cases they had case
studies to present to support their
contention that transit astrology was
predictive of what happened in
psychedelic or holotropic breathwork
sessions.
But when I was looking at my sessions
all my history and I have all my
astrology of all my sessions plotted
and I was looking back over all 20 years
the correlation that they pointed to and
I and I did see certain patterns of
correlations between astrology and the
flow of my rhythm of my
my sessions.
But I saw many instances where they did
not correlate.
Uh that there was a failure of
correlation. So that in some
circumstances when the astrology were
very supportive of dynamic change, my
sessions were flat. And conversely,
sometimes when the astrology was flat,
my sessions really involved dynamic
change. And sometimes when two sessions
were close to each other,
um they did not under very they this the
sessions were very very different under
basically the same astrological skies in
the outer planet way.
And so I've recently uh written an
article
uh and it's out chasing a journal right
now
in which I tried to reconcile or to
integrate Rick and Stan's position,
which I affirm, and my own experience,
which is different, that it's a more
complex relationship between the outer
planets and one's experience.
And it's what I propose what I would
call the roll-off hypothesis.
The idea is this, that consciousness
covers an enormous spectrum.
And when one is working at the
near-at-hand portion of the spectrum,
either with low doses of LSD or we a
gentler psychedelic like psilocybin or
holotropic breathwork, which is tends to
be gentler,
if you're working at the lower end of
the spectrum, and by lower I just mean
closer to time-space end,
the correlations with the planets would
be stronger.
But if you're using a very powerful
protocol and you're you're going beyond
space and time and you're working beyond
archetypal reality itself,
the correlations would be weaker.
There'll be a roll-off. And it's not
like you ever cross a point and there's
a switch and they cease to exist, but
that the general roll off, a lack of as
tight fit.
Uh so, that's why
I put the dates of all my sessions and
my birth dates in the appendix in the
back of the book, so that astrologers
who really want to look at these things
can examine themselves. I mean, I'm not
a professional astrologer, I'm an
amateur.
Uh so, I invite professional astrologers
to look at these correlations and see
what they see. Cuz I think it's an
important I think it's a very
interesting intellectual topic.
>> So.
Yeah, thank you for that. Um that that
uh actually clarifies something for me,
so yeah, very interesting. Um the the
last thing if if you have time that I
that I was hoping we could touch on um
was
um the notion of the future human,
um
which is something that um
uh I think a lot about. James and I have
spent spent some time uh exploring. Um
and
again, kind of an open-ended question
just as to, you know, with with that
something we can unfold a little bit.
When maybe as an entry point um
Yeah. I'm curious about your sense of
the manifestation of that and uh in
particular
um how it connects to something we
discussed earlier. Um the relationship
of the the individual to the whole.
Um
uh maybe I can just tell a a quick a
quick story um
um
uh
a
I guess I would say a uh a significant
mentor, a spiritual teacher of mine who
was also the uh the astrologer who
turned my world upside down by
effectively showing showing me a a
mirror of myself even even though he was
a complete stranger.
>> Mhm.
>> Um
uh one of the stories that he shared
with me was an encounter with David
Bohm, the uh the the physicist.
>> Yeah.
>> And
um who is had been working with
Krishnamurti, you know, somebody who is
also in his in his way looking at
the uh relationship between um
uh thought, memory, uh human suffering.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
uh and um this gentleman put the
question to to David Bohm,
"How many how many
people would it take
to affect this transformation in the
human consciousness that Krishnamurti
seems to be pointing to?"
And Bohm
took a few minutes, you know, just kind
of went inward and did some kind of
calculation in in his mind,
and then he he replied, "Between 6 and
20."
>> Wow. 6 and 20.
>> Between 6 and 20 uh individuals.
Um and there was something about um you
know, I'm I'm not conveying the full the
full depth of the story as it was
conveyed, but it it really rang there
was something about it that that really
rang uh a bell for me that there was
some there was some truth in in
this you know, this this statement. Um
so, uh in light of that I'm I'm just
sort of curious about about what you
think. What What What's your sense of
what this human future human might be
like in in that context?
>> Well,
>> [clears throat]
>> you know, for your readers, for your
listeners who don't know my book,
there's a chapter called The Birth of
the Future Human.
And in that chapter, I do something I
don't do anywhere else in the book cuz
the book is chronological in sequence,
but here I gather together in one place
all the visions that I had been given
around uh where humanity is in its
evolution and a pivot that we seem to be
in the coming up on and and processing.
And it it
it is, I think the most important
chapter of the book because it concerns
your children, your grandchildren, my
grandchildren, all of our
great-grandchildren.
And that that has immediate and
relevance and uh
And it it's some ways sort of like it
reminds me of Black Elk, whom I
mentioned in the book. When Black Elk
was a child, I think he was 10 years old
and he he got sick and he had this went
into a visionary state for days.
And he was given these visions of the
collapse of the Lakota people and the
kind of the change that was impending
for the Lakota people.
And he was so taken aback by his visions
that he didn't share them for years and
years. He didn't share them.
And I was completely taken aback cuz
it
with retrospectively I saw that I had
been being prepared for these visions. I
had been given a series of experiences
that allowed me to enter into fusion
states with the collective psyche that
allowed me to
develop the elasticity of consciousness
to enter into the becoming that would
allow these visions to be poured into
me.
>> [snorts]
>> And I had no idea that it was possible
uh to have
foreknowledge or to be given sort of
prophetic kind of visionary experiences.
It's not It's not what you see so much
as what you experience. You you go into
what I call deep time.
And and enter into a different modality
of time consciousness.
And I began to have a lot of experiences
that humanity was at a turning point,
was coming into an extraordinarily rich,
powerful time in its in its story. Uh we
were approaching a turning point which
is a before and after point in human
history.
And uh that
it was going to be make the past
irrelevant. It was such a profound
restructuring that would would make a
complete set us on a completely
different trajectory in human evolution
on the planet.
And this I received about six visions
over the course of 4 years. And this is
like
early 1990 to 1994. I mean it was I was
not tuned to these type of issues. I
wasn't tuned to ecological thought, had
no idea of the pending global car
polycrisis that we're coming into now.
>> [snorts]
>> It nowhere never showed me
how we were going to make this
transition.
But then in December of 1995
when I was working at a very advanced
level stage of the work, the last 5
years of the work,
it took me very very deep. It dissolved
me. First it dissolved me into the
collective psyche and I became one with
humanity.
And then it took me deep into the future
and it gave me what I came to understand
was an experience of the death and
rebirth of humanity.
I saw I experienced humanity going
through a deep and profound unraveling.
Uh
they were being tasked by a series of
compounding crises that were un they
were hitting humanity and causing an
unraveling of life as we had known it so
that the things that we had assumed that
we could rely on, we couldn't assume
that we could we couldn't assume them
anymore. There was a deep undoing of
life, a deep challenging until we were
reduced to simply trying to stay alive,
just try to survive.
And it looked for a while like we were
going to be extinct. This was it. This
was over.
But then
things began to get better. Things the
crisis passed. It was like a hurricane
that goes over an island, it passes, and
people began to pick themselves up, and
they began to recollect.
And when they did, they found that they
had been profoundly and permanently
changed by something that had happened
in the depth of the crisis.
Something about the ordeal that we went
through changed us profoundly, changed
us deeply. The way that when there is a
flood and you find the community coming
together heroically and doing
extraordinary things for their
neighbors. Something of that, except
this was a global event, not a a local
event, but it was global.
And I found that that after this crisis
that there was a a set of new values
that were permeating all of us, new
capacities, new states of consciousness,
new social arrangements, new insights.
We were It was as if we were able to
download um insights from deeper into
the collective intelligence or the the
spiritual intelligence of the universe.
Uh it just represented a major
transition.
And I came to understand that this
wasn't simply a shift in industry, a
shift in economics, or even a shift in
in paradigm, worldview.
That this had triggered a shift in the
fundamental structure of the collective
psyche. That the collective unconscious
coming out of this crisis was different
than the collective unconscious going
into it.
It's a shift in what I would call the
plate tectonics of the collective
psyche.
So [snorts] that I be I began to
understand that I was being shown what I
could language as a future human.
A different kind of human being.
Not
same number of fingers and toes and same
physical strata strata, but a deep and
profound shift that had taken place in
the collective psyche so that every
human being born after that point in
time would be living out of a a
different collective field of
consciousness than previously.
And then in the years following, I had
several
deep In fact, my last
the last great vision of my journey in
session 70 took me deep into the future
and gave me my deepest vision of the
experience of the future human.
And uh I had several times had this
experience of the humanity
that nature is giving birth to here.
And and that's where how I have come to
understand this these challenges that
we're facing, the the COVID challenge
and the and the political
hyper-reactionary conservatism and the
convulsions that we're going through and
the the building ecological crisis
that's we're trying to deny politically,
but it's there and it's coming. It's
coming hard and the disruption to
agriculture and disruption to health
care and and the forced migration of
of eco-migrants from billions of people
being shoved away from the oceans as the
as the oceans rise. There's tremendous
trauma coming.
And I be
Now I understand that what I'm
experiencing what we're experiencing are
the labor pains
of the birth of the future human.
And that gestation is long and we have
been gestating the future human for
hundreds of thousands of years, but now
we're coming to the time of labor where
we have to deliver this being or we will
die. And I think the form of the human
being is precisely the diamond soul. It
is the soul that we're trying to give
birth to. And when the soul awakens in
the human in the human consciousness, it
But, it just opens the door to a
different future because
it helps us understand and remember we
have had relationships with all these
beings over all these thousands of
years. We have been all these people.
None of the divisions that we've been
drawing in history are worth a pile of
beans that they're they're not
important. That there is a break a birth
of oneness as we grow into the magnitude
of the being that has we have been
gestating all these years.
So, I I think we are
how I understand the 20th century
is a time of tremendous trauma,
tremendous
challenge,
but also extraordinary potential.
Uh extraordinary accelerated potential,
which
has profound implications for history
and profound implications for our future
generations. I wasn't given any details.
I wasn't shown any that I wasn't shown
when. I wasn't shown any of the details,
but I was taken inside the experience of
humanity
when we went through just what we go
through in a psychedelic session,
a collective death, surrender to
circumstance,
and then a rebirth into a completely new
set of potentials, a completely new set
of capacities that we didn't have
before.
An awakening of the human heart into new
capacities, a turning point in human
history.
That's my best visionary uh experience
of what humanity is lining up to go
through.
And it took me a year to recover from
that particular experience, and it led
me to see everyone I see around me, all
the people I see on the planet as
absolute heroes. They are heroes because
they are here
as we enter these hard times and they
knew what they were getting into and
they chose to be part of this
transformation.
And everyone here
deserves our complete and absolute
respect for being taking on life at this
time in history.
And I think it will produce wonderful
outcome. I I believe
I mean, I have friends
seriously intellectually competent
people who believe that we're extinct.
We're already so overdrawn the planet's
resources, we're dead, but we just don't
know it.
But at least in my visionary experience
that this is not true that we do come
through it.
I'm afraid a lord my concern is how much
of the human population will have to die
before we wake up and come to our
senses. The sooner we come into wisdom,
the fewer of us are going to have to
die.
We may lose half or more than half of
the world's population before this is
over. This is not because this is what I
saw.
This is what I'm looking at when I when
I read the ecological literature.
Um
but I think there is something
magnificent being born
from this struggle.
Yeah, and we're all part of it.
Yeah.
>> Beautifully said.
>> Well, yeah, that's beautiful, man. I
think we that's a great place to end it.
Um thank you for uh coming on the show
and having such uh
beautiful lifetime's worth of work and
sharing it with us and being such a
important
>> James. Thank you, David for this very
rich conversation. I really I really
appreciate it.